Ancient Faith Radio presents Homilies from All Saints, taken from the weekly sermons by Father Patrick Henry Reardon, priest at All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
Here's Father Pat.
You're the name of the Father, the love of the Son, the love of the Holy Spirit.
Amen.
First, beloved of the Lord,
Let me greet all of you for being here tonight on behalf of the parish.
And also to congratulate you on assuming this ministry and mission, which often feels and appears to be without hope.
See, what you're doing by your involvement in this work is prophetic.
And you remember how the prophets normally ended up.
I'm hoping for each of you there will be a fiery chariot.
I read the program and it says that I am the guest speaker here tonight.
The last time I was invited to speak at a pro-life thing in January was nearly 40 years ago.
It was a truerel, Virginia, right before the march the next day
in the Capitol.
And I was part of a team.
It seems to me there were six or seven of us that spoke at that big rally.
I spoke last, and I think they intended for me to get everybody all fired up.
And I hope I did that.
But I remember some of the other speakers who spoke right before me were on the team.
Everett Coop, for example, was the Surgeon General of the United States.
Jerry Falwell, a well-known evangelist back in those days.
Bernard Nathanson, a former abortion doctor who became extremely pro-life after he discovered God.
It was at that rally, by the way, that he first
He first declared that he believed in God.
His first time, he declared he believed in God.
There's so many things in what to say.
I'm going to have to tell myself to the scriptures as best I can because otherwise, and I was sure, I thought, I won't need any notes.
I need notes for control.
Because you just turned me loose on this without anything.
Boy, you'd miss breakfast tomorrow.
Tonight I'm going to talk to you about the mind's contract, its compact, its contract, its bereith, its covenant with reality.
The mind was made for reality.
Created reality.
Reality is in danger
right now.
And creation has already been rejected even as a concept.
We're dealing with the current and common notion that knowledge is the product of thought instead of the recognition of light.
We might call knowledge, this knowledge, man-made, except it's risky to use the word man these days.
Created reality, beloved in the Lord, is a product of light.
In the beginning God created heaven and the earth.
And the world was Tohu, the earth was Tohu of Wohu.
Very mixed up.
Confusion, chaos.
And it was darkness everywhere.
Hoshik al-Pene Tahom, darkness on the face of the depths.
Then God speaks.
God's first word, by Yom Elohim Yehior, by Yehior.
God said, let there be light, and there was light.
What is this light?
What's this light?
He's not going to create the sun and the moon for three more days.
What is this light?
Guinitito Fos, says the Septuagint, Guinitito Fos.
Guinitito Fos.
What is this light?
Of course, it's the same light that appears in the first chapter of the Gospel of John.
The light we read about is our Gospel reading for the night of Pascha, at night of nights then, where the light shines in the darkness.
This is the light of reality because
All things are created in the Logos.
That's what distinguishes us from Muslims.
This great mythology, which I'm afraid too many Orthodox have bought, that we worship the same God as the Muslims that came out of us.
They don't think so.
They know better.
The God we worship is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
If he's not the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, then it is a false God.
This is the beginning, however, of created reality, where God creates the internal truth of reality.
This is God's first activity, His first enirgea.
That's the first expression of enirgea, God's activity in the world.
His first activity outside Himself.
Everything else emanates from this light.
He speaks this light into creation and makes it real.
And God determines that this light will have nothing to do with the darkness.
This darkness, this hoshek, this scottos in the Greek, has nothing to do with light.
Paul made that very point when he asked the Corinthian, 2 Corinthians 6, E. T. Iskina and E. F. T. Prossop,
Proscottos.
Can there be what is what King Onion?
What fellowship?
What communion is there between light and darkness?
It was very interesting that he says that with respect to marriage.
That's the context in which he speaks of that.
No fellowship between light and darkness.
I'm not sure I like the word fellowship very much.
For me, it suggests, I don't know, something rather frivolous.
I prefer the Latin word commune.
There must be no confusion of darkness with light.
There is no middle ground.
They have nothing to do with one another.
Between them, there is no quinonia.
There is no compromise.
There's not an inch of room for discussion.
We cannot come to some meeting of the mind, some neutral position.
It is all in.
God divides and separates light from darkness.
And God separates the light from the darkness.
They have nothing to do with one another.
The light is reality as God creates it.
We can know it because of his gift of inner light that we have as human beings.
It has nothing to do with chaos and the confusion of darkness.
Now on the final day of creation, God makes one creature on whom he endows the capacity to perceive the light
that emanates from reality.
To recognize the difference between light and darkness, he makes this creature in his own image and likeness.
And now, for the first time, the Bible speaks of sex.
Although sex is found in both animals and plants, the creation account does not speak of sex except in relationship to human beings.
Zakhar van Akheba, Balau Tom, male and female, he created them.
The first time he speaks of sex.
By the way, and this is parenthesis, the Greek expression there in the Septuagint, Arsin K. Thiele, Arsin Kithiti, male and female, is not a combination it's found very often in the Bible.
It's interesting that the two places where it really stands out is in the book of Leviticus,
when it talks about sexual perversion, and these two terms are used, and also in Romans 1, the first chapter of Romans.
The very first commandment of the human race received from God is about sex.
Increase and multiply.
increase and multiply.
This is always a church being considered to be both a blessing and a command.
There's not a trace in the entire Christian tradition.
There's not a trace of dissent on this point.
That sex must never, from the human side, sex must never
be divorced from procreation.
They have to go together.
God can give the child.
We don't try to have babies.
God is the baby.
God wants us to do our part, but we must never, ever put an impediment to the activity of God that is locking God out of the bedroom.
And there'll be no blessings on any household where God is locked out of the bedroom.
This has always been considered a command.
There was never any dissent among the fathers of the Church, East or West, Catholic or Orthodox, no dissent anywhere until the 20th century, specifically in 1930, in the Lambeth Synod of 1930.
There's an anger consented.
In 1930, the Lambeth Synod said, well, there might be some occasion for contraception, might, by rare exception, 1930.
It's interesting that the Anglican bishops said that in 1930.
Last week, just this past week, those bishops decided that
Men can be married to men and women to women.
It's a logical progression.
There was in 1930, less than a hundred years ago, there was full consent among all Christians of ever-strength.
Protestant, Catholic, Orthodox, whatever, all they didn't always agree about the Trinity, I agree about Christ.
On that point, they all agreed.
That was a command without exception.
In 1965, in reaction, it wasn't done.
It wasn't 1965 when I couldn't reason my dates.
The encyclical.
65, I think.
65, y'all.
There were several major statements by church leaders in reaction to this in 1965.
I want to make sure I had my dates right because we're dealing with my memory.
The most notable of these was the encycled gate of Paul VI, the Monte Vite.
That was quickly followed by similar statements from each of the orthodox patriarchates, first of all, by the ecumenical patriarch himself and the Holy Synod of Constantinople, put out a joint statement.
The reason I wanted the dates right, because I remember when I was in Rome,
And it was 1965.
And that's when I met patriarchy, Thanagoras, in 1965.
He had just issued his own statement in support of what the Pope said.
That has always been the official teaching of the Orthodox Church.
Always.
No exceptions.
Until people start to stray from the faith sometime in the late 20th century.
But it is a strange strain from the faith.
For the first time in Christian history, a group of bishops separated, sex from creation.
It was a sin against the light.
As I say last week, the sons of Lambeth, that child, way to go.
I appreciate hearing the enthusiasm for this sermon.
These are really very sweet people.
I think when the fathers of Lamb Beth met in 1930, they couldn't possibly have foreseen the evils they had unleashed.
Everything else has flowed from that.
As soon as sex is separated from procreation, there's no reason anymore whatsoever.
The sex has to be between a man and a woman.
No reason whatsoever.
You can't think of all.
It now becomes quite arbitrary, quite flexible and malleable.
You see, on the question of sex, the world has returned to Tobu, the vocal, to confusion and chaos.
Children are now the disposable byproducts.
The marriage is not for the procreation of children.
The children are now disposable byproducts.
Once God was locked out of the bedroom, everything quickly turned to confusion.
And this has all happened in my adult life.
Once we replace sex with gender, all bets were off.
I said some similar things.
Corpus Christi in June of last year to a group of Lutherans.
I will not be invited back.
But I was reacting to, there was a team of six of us.
I was reacting to a statement by one of the Roman Catholic contributors there.
The stadium's ahead of her theology department.
He made references to the male gender.
I said, pardon me.
There's no such thing as a male gender.
There's a masculine gender, and it has to do with grammar.
Human beings are not created according to laws of grammar, but physical laws, biological laws.
Once we replace sex with gender, the gender is malleable.
You know, the word for the word for a little girl in German mentioned is doc mentioned, is neuter.
With all the little girls I ever met, we're all quite feminine.
Now, beloved in the Lord, we have a sick society which elementary biology is ignored.
Now, who's paying the price for this insanity?
Little children are paying the price for this insanity.
Babies.
Little babies made in God's image and likeness.
Once again, we see the sacrifice of children on the altar of Baal.
The Founding Fathers of this country were quite explicit.
They were trying to refound the Roman Republic.
That's every year.
You see that everywhere.
Am I right on that?
You know that literature.
They tried to refound the Roman Republic.
You see, that's you.
Jefferson, Adams, all of them.
Refound the Roman Republic.
What do we have now?
Carthage.
The wrong side is one of the recent Punic War.
At the base of this predicament, this horrible thing of the sacrifice of little kids, meaning God's image and likeness, at the base of this, the core problem is idolatry.
We're worshiping the puny gods.
We're worshiping God of tire.
and cited him.
Quite recently, I was watching the news, which is a depressing thing to do these days.
And the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States, she said that abortion is good for the economy.
I'm glad she had the honesty to admit what it's all about.
The little children, their little bodies have to be used to greeze the trucks of industry.
It's a false God.
I'm glad that the people in charge of this ministry decided that we weren't going to stop it just because the Supreme Court finally got something right.
because the problems still persist.
It's a deeper problem, however.
God will not pour His blessings on any people that slaughter His children.
They can expect nothing good from God.
There will be no blessings.
We should bring Him back to Elijah.
Bring Him back to Mount Carmel.
Which God are we going to serve?
Because there is no kinemia between light and darkness.
That's what Elijah says, decide, decide.
And then remember they had a little bit of friendly competition.
And after
Elijah brings that three and a half years of drought with a simple prayer.
He looks out over the sea from Mount Carmel, looks out over the sea.
He sees a cloud the side of a man's hand.
He turns to Ahab and says, we better move.
There's going to be a flood.
And that began the first march for life, where Elijah marches from Mount Carmel to Mount Horeb.
Paul is back in the footsteps of Moses to go to the meat of the living God at Horeb.
The way the text reads in Kings, it's always bone me over.
Ahab's not going to lay a hand on Elijah now, not after what just happened to the priests of Baal, not going to lay a hand on.
Ahab gets in his chariot, and all those men get in their chariots, and they write a breakneck speed that's 16 miles of separated Mount Carmel from Jezreel.
They're writing a breakneck speed, and what does the sacred text says?
And Elijah ran out ahead of them.
Outrunning these horses for 60 miles.
Well, anyway.
And then he continues.
He has a long pilgrimage.
I've always called out the first march for life.
I see I've always called it that.
It was 40 years ago last time I did it.
But I've always seen it that way, though.
First march for life.
He marched by himself.
One man's conscience standing up to the entire politicalist and social system.
You, beloved in the Lord, are the venei libiyim.
You are the children of the prophets.
You are assured of a great deal of darkness, despondency,
discouragement, but you fought with a good fight.
You continue to fight with a good fight.
The blessing of God will be upon you, on your minds, in your hearts.
One cannot serve the living God, fruitlessly.
The living God
for his benediction upon you and upon all your labors.
And my task for tonight is simply to remind you of this.
Amen.
Homilies from All Saints with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of Ancient Faith Radio.